In this lesson, we will cover one of the most fundamental
grammar concepts on the SAT: the complete sentence.
Understanding what makes a sentence complete is the key
to every punctuation question in the Boundaries category.
A complete sentence must have three things.
First, a subject — the noun or pronoun that performs
or receives the action.
Second, a finite verb — a verb that shows tense,
such as runs, ran, or has run.
And third, a complete thought — the sentence must not
leave the reader expecting more information.
When a complete sentence can stand on its own —
when it does not depend on another clause to make sense —
we call it an independent clause.
Look at this example: "The engineers tested the new prototype."
The word "engineers" is the subject.
"Tested" is the finite verb.
And the thought is complete.
This is an independent clause.
Here is a reliable test you can use on the SAT.
Cover the clause you are evaluating. Read it on its own.
If it can stand alone as a complete sentence,
it is an independent clause.
If it cannot — if it sounds unfinished or begins with a word like
"although," "because," or "since" —
it is a dependent clause or a fragment.
Compare these two examples.
The first begins with the word "although."
Because of that word, the clause is dependent.
It sounds unfinished — we are waiting for the other half
of the sentence. This is a fragment.
The second example removes "although,"
and now the clause stands alone perfectly.
It is a complete sentence.
When two independent clauses appear together, the SAT expects
you to punctuate them correctly.
You have three valid options: a period, a semicolon,
or a comma followed by a coordinating conjunction —
for, and, nor, but, or, yet, or so.
Here, a period or a semicolon correctly separates
these two complete sentences.
The most common mistake students make is the comma splice.
This happens when a comma alone connects two independent clauses.
A comma by itself is not strong enough to join
two complete sentences.
If you see a comma separating two full sentences on the SAT,
that answer choice is wrong.
Here is your takeaway.
Before you choose any punctuation answer on the SAT,
identify both clauses.
Test each one: can it stand alone as a complete sentence?
Once you know which clauses are independent,
the correct punctuation follows the rule.
Every Boundaries decision starts with identifying complete sentences.